Last week we left Jesus in the basement of the high priest's chaiaphas.
And we left him there after he had been arrested and beat and flogged.
And after he told Peter that if you live by the sword, you die by the sword.
And after Peter denied Jesus and the cockroach twice, and after the servant girl identified Peter as one of those followers of Jesus.
There was chaos in the land.
Nothing was as it should have been.
And yet this was in the middle of a religious festival called the Passover.
And at the festival, the governor of Rome and of Jerusalem at that time, he was to give a Paschal lamb to return one of the prisoners.
to the gathered people and to absolve them of their crimes, to release them from their sin.
And the people gathered and their choices that year were insurrectionist, rioting the murderous man who, well, he just didn't seem to be able to get it together.
And then there was Jesus, Mary's baby, born in Bethlehem under that star where the wise people came and they looked at him and they said, surely this is the Messiah, the one who has come to save.
The other choice was this Jesus who had traveled with 12 disciples teaching them of all the things that God was about to do to set the people free and make the blind to see, to heal the land.
There was this Jesus who broke bread with the disciples just a few hours before.
at the Passover mill and he changed it a little bit.
He said, I'm going to wash your feet.
And unless I wash your feet, you cannot be with me in paradise.
And then he gave them bread and he said to them, take this bread and eat for this is my body, given for you.
And every time you do this, every time you rehearse this, every time you re-enact this, do it in remembrance of me.
The other choice was this Jesus who took the cup.
It would have been wine then, Dr. Bob.
He took the cup of wine and he gave it to his disciples and he said, drink from this all of you.
This is the cup of the new covenant poured out for you and for many for the forgiveness of sins so that you can go and forgive others since.
Do you remember the prayer that Jesus prayed?
He prayed it so much that he prayed it in the garden of Gethsemane when he was headed to his death.
He said, forgive us our trespasses.
Some of you remember, forgive us our debts at the same measure that we forgive the trespasses of others.
Did you hear that?
Forgive our sins, oh God.
at the same measure that we forgive the sins of other people.
The time of trial has come.
And Jesus and Barabbas stand before Pilate.
And in the Gospel of Matthew, the 27th chapter, starting in the 15th verse, we hear these words.
Now at the festival, the governor was accustomed to release a prisoner for the crowd, anyone whom they wanted.
At that time, they had a notorious
notorious prisoner called Jesus Barabbas.
So after they had gathered, Pilate said to them, whom do you want me to release for you, Jesus?
Jesus Barabbas or Jesus who was called the Messiah?
For he realized that it was out of jealousy that they had handed him over.
While he was sitting on the judgment seat,
His wife sent word to him, have nothing to do with that innocent man.
For today I have suffered a great deal because of a dream about him.
Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus killed.
The governor again said to them,
Which of the two do you want me to release for you?"
And they said, Barabbas.
Pilate said to them, then what should I do with Jesus who is called the Messiah?
All of them said, let him be crucified.
Hear that.
Then he asked, why?
What evil has he done?
But they shouted all the more, let him be crucified.
So when Pilate saw that he could do nothing, but rather that a riot was beginning, he took some water and washed his hands before the crowd, saying, I am innocent of this man's blood.
see to it yourselves, then the people as a whole answered, his blood beyond us and our children.
So he released Barabbas for them.
And after flogging Jesus, he handed him over to be crucified.
This is the word of God for the people of God.
Thanks be to God.
Lord, we've come expecting a word from you, so speak now.
For your servants are listening, allow your Holy Spirit to fall fresh on us so that the Holy Spirit preacher shall come.
Hide this your servant behind that old rugged cross.
So did everything that is said and everything that is done come straight from you, O God.
This is your servant's prayer in the name of Jesus the Christ, we pray.
Amen.
They handed him over to be crucified.
In the Gospel of Matthew, we understand that the Gospel writer is a little different from Mark and Luke because Matthew is trying to pull everybody together.
Matthew includes and highlights Jewish worship traditions as a part of the gospel that he writes.
And we see that in this text today through the hand washing of Pilate.
Hand washing was a worship custom.
When you came into the temple, you washed your hands as a sign that you were being made clean in Jesus Christ.
Pilot washed his hands.
And he said, I am innocent of this man's blood.
You do this yourselves.
In other words, this is on you.
I remember years ago we sat down to eat dinner one night and my mom put our least favorite meal in front of us.
Dr. Bob, it was a salad.
And I remember it so vividly, there was French dressing on this salad.
And I was upset because we were all out of ranch or blue cheese.
And French was the only dressing that was available.
And mom doused the salad in French dressing.
Oh, did I tell you I can't stand French dressing?
My brother and I sat there and looked at it.
Mom ran upstairs to get ready for some meeting at church, and we were supposed to eat and be ready by the time she came back down.
We looked at it.
I said, Jason, we better eat.
We're gonna get in trouble.
We looked at it.
Jason, we better eat.
We're gonna get in trouble.
Lisa, I picked at that salad.
Picked at it some more.
Till it was almost gone, Miss Ruby.
But my brother, he was having none of this.
He was not going to eat lettuce for dinner.
He did not care what dressing was on it, that cucumbers were in it, cucumbers were our favorite.
He did not care.
He was not eating lettuce for dinner.
And mom came downstairs and she noticed that not much of the food had been eaten.
And she said, you better eat, that's all you're getting.
And when I come back down here, be ready to go.
Well, we weren't ready to go.
when she came back down, I was still picking at my food and Jason dumped his in the trash can.
I don't know how moms know, but they just know.
Do you know Maya, the first thing she did when she came down those stairs was to look in the trash can.
She said, who did this?
It wasn't me.
And do you know my brother had the nerve to say?
And my mom, she said, you're going to tell me who did it.
You're going to, somebody's going to fess up here.
You don't lie in my house.
You don't tell stories.
Now you couldn't say lie then.
You don't tell stories in my house.
And you certainly don't tell stories to me.
Who put the lettuce in the trash can?
Mom, it was not me, it was not me.
And my brother just looked down and shook his head.
She said, fine then, both of you are punished.
I was so upset, Lisa, I was fit to be tied beyond, because you know, the worst thing that could happen to me was to get in trouble for something that I did not do.
I was so angry with my brother.
I was so angry with my mother.
But mostly my feelings were hurt because my mother did not know that it was not me.
Luckily, we had a kind of mother who punished you at night and she forgot about it by the morning.
And so it wasn't a long punishment.
But till this day, I'm still upset about it.
I'm still holding on to it.
Dr. Bob, I think I need to go and talk to Jesus about this.
Have you ever gotten in trouble for something you didn't do?
How did it feel?
Did you like it?
Was it warm and fuzzy?
Was it something to celebrate?
And if it was public, did it bring you any shame?
Shame that somebody could think that you would do such a thing.
See, the author of our study says that there's a difference between shame and guilt, and we get the mixed up.
Shame means that we are bad.
Guilt means that we did something that was bad.
And so many times if we get in trouble for something we didn't do, we allow it to frame us.
We allow it to become our identity.
We allow it to bring us shame.
She thinks I'm a bad person.
She thinks I put the salad in the trash can.
They think
I murdered somebody.
They think healing is worth death.
Can you imagine the shame brought about that, that Barabbas, Jesus, Barabbas and Jesus, the Messiah stood next to each other in this public forum and there showed up shame.
Every crime of Jesus Barabbas was listed for all of the people to see and hear.
And it was called out crime by crime by crime.
And this wasn't the first time that Jesus Barabbas would have stood before a crowd with his crimes listed because he was notorious.
That meant he was a chronic offender.
that people knew of him as a murderer just because just when his name was called.
Can you imagine walking around with a title just because you show up?
Somebody has labeled you lazy.
Somebody has labeled you stupid.
Somebody has labeled you unkind.
Somebody has labeled you not good at something.
The amount of shame that brings on, some people begin to live into those titles.
I was talking to a gentleman the other day who had just gotten out of federal crime, 30 years in federal prison because he was in the wrong place at the wrong time.
He was with a friend who shot somebody during a burglary and they both went to prison.
He got 30 years, his friends got life.
and he was walking around with a smile on his face.
And I said, how can you be smiling?
He said, preach I'm out.
I said, but you did 30 years and you didn't do the shooting.
He said, I know Pastor, but I worked through my shame.
He said, I shouldn't have been there.
My grandma told me to stay home, but I went anyway.
I was disobedient.
And I was shamed that I was disobedient because grandma told me this would happen.
What is your shame?
What is it that you have taken on?
that is not yours to bear.
Mine was my mom thinks that I threw that in the trash, that I'm wasteful and that I'm a liar.
I don't want her to think that about me.
And Barabbas, what we learn about Barabbas in history is that Barabbas actually might not have been as bad as a guy as we thought.
He was walking in the historical footsteps of another man called Judas Barabbas.
And Judas Barabbas led the Greeks into freedom through an insurrection.
of slavery and into the light.
And what we learned was that this Barabbas, Jesus' Barabbas, was trying to do the same thing.
He was trying to lead people out of Roman rule and into freedom through insurrection and resulting murder.
Imagine the shame when he stood up there and said and looked his mother in the face.
And they called him a notorious murderer when he was trying to help his people get free.
Imagine the shame of Jesus.
The human Jesus who knows his purpose and his plan, but is still human at this point and is standing in front of his mother, has done nothing wrong.
And yet they're saying release this bravest and kill that Jesus.
And the text says over and over again, all of them, the whole of the gathered crowd, everybody there was on one accord.
Let Berevis go crucify Jesus.
We sit in this shame.
We sit in the consequences of our actions, we sit in our choices, and we wonder if we have become these things instead of these things being choices that we made.
I've seen so many people where they let their choices define who they are instead of a timeline in their life.
And we condemn people to that kind of shamefulness as well.
We say out loud, shame on you.
And in doing so, we bind people up.
We bind them up to a word, to a category, to a thing.
And instead of calling them by their name, we call them by their shame.
And the word of the Lord for us today is be free.
Be free from whatever shame you have been carrying.
Be free from whatever category they put you in.
Be free from whatever they tried to make you.
And remember that you are made in the image of God.
And God says that you are beautifully and wonderfully made.
God is pleased with you and by you just because you exist.
There will always be a crowd that exists to condemn you.
There will always be somebody who wants to shame you.
There will always be somebody who wants you to be bound up.
Because if you are free, then you get to live abundant life.
If you are free, then you get to be healed.
If you are free, then you get to be free indeed.
And you get to enjoy the benefits of the crucifixion.
Hear these words from the Gospel of Luke.
There were two others also who were criminals and they were led away to be put to death with Jesus.
And one of the criminals who hang there kept deriding him and saying, are you not the Messiah?
Save yourself and us.
But the other rebuked him saying, do not fear God.
Do you not fear God?
Since you are under the same sentence of condemnation And we indeed have been condemned justly for we are getting what we deserve for our demons But this man This man has done nothing wrong Then the criminal said Jesus
Remember me.
Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom.
And Jesus replied, truly I tell you, today you will be with me in paradise.
What will it be?
Shame or freedom?
Well, will it be abundant life or a sentence of condemnation?
What will it be?
I know who I am and whose I am or will it be that we allow somebody else to name us and call us shame?
Whether you are Barabbas or whether you're as close to Jesus as we can get, you have a choice to make.
You can be who God created you to be or you can be full of shame.
Are you the criminal who
poked at Jesus and derided him and said, you're up here with us, dude.
Why don't you get down?
You're supposed to be so big and bad.
Almighty or the one on the other hand.
We know better.
We're in the same situation.
We're on the same planet.
We live in the same city.
We live with the same stuff.
Your zip code might have tree-lined streets, and my zip code might have some trash on the ground, but we are the same.
Jesus, remember us.
Remind us of our names.
Take away our shame and allow us into your paradise.
In the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, we pray, amen.